Create chain-monitoring.mdx (#764)
ethereum-optimism/docs: pages/builders/chain-operators/tools/chain-monitoring.mdx

---
title: Chain Monitoring Options
lang: en-US
description: Learn the basics of onchain and offchain monitoring options for your OP Stack chain.
---

import { Callout } from 'nextra/components'

# Chain Monitoring Options

This explainer covers the basics of **onchain** and **offchain** monitoring options for your OP Stack chain. Onchain monitoring services allow chain operators to monitor the overall system and onchain events.
Offchain monitoring allows chain operators to monitor the operation and behavior of nodes and other offchain components.

## Onchain Monitoring Services

Onchain monitoring services provide insights into the overall system and helps chain operators track and monitor onchain events. Some examples of onchain monitoring services include `monitorism` and `dispute-mon`.

### `monitorism`

Monitorism is a tooling suite that supports monitoring and active remediation actions for the OP Stack chain. Monitorism uses monitors as passive security providing automated monitoring for the OP Stack. They are used to monitor the OP stack and alert on specific events that could be a sign of a security incident.

> Currently. the list of monitors includes:

Reviewer: I would divide this list in two parts:
1. Security Integrity Monitor: These are monitors necessary for making sure Bridges between L2 and L1 are safe and work as expected. These monitors are divided in two subgroup:
1. a Pre-Faultproof chain monitors: Fault Monitor, Withdrawals Monitor
2.b Faultproof chain monitors: Faulproof Withdrawals
2. Security monitors: Those tools monitor other aspects of several contracts used in optimism.
Global Events Monitor,Liveness Expiration Monitor,Balances Monitor,Multisig Monitor,Drippie Monitor,Secrets Monitor

Reviewer 2: @bradleycamacho

*   Faultproof chain monitors:
    *   Faultproof Withdrawal: The Faultproof Withdrawal component monitors `ProvenWithdrawals` events on the `OptimismPortal` contract and performs checks to detect any violations of invariant conditions on the chain. If a violation is detected, it logs the issue and sets a Prometheus metric for the event. This component is designed to work exclusively with chains that are already utilizing the Fault Proofs system. This is a new version of the deprecated chain-mon faultproof-wd-mon. For detailed information on how the component works and the algorithms used, please refer to the component README.

Security monitors: Those tools monitor other aspects of several contracts used in optimism:

*   Global Events Monitor: made for to taking YAML rules as configuration and monitoring the events that are emitted on the chain.
*   Liveness Expiration Monitor: monitors the liveness expiration on Safes.
*   Balances Monitor: emits a metric reporting the balances for the configured accounts.

> *   Multisig Monitor: The multisig monitor reports the paused status of the OptimismPortal contract. If set, the latest nonce of the configured Safe address. And also if set, the latest presigned nonce stored in One Password. The latest presigned nonce is identified by looking for items in the configured vault that follow a `ready-<nonce>.json` name. The highest nonce of this item name format is reported.

Reviewer 2: This sentence - "If set, the latest nonce of the configured Safe address. And also if set, the latest presigned nonce stored in One Password." sounds confusing.

Do we want to reword it to -> "If set, reports the latest nonce of the configured Safe address and the latest presigned nonce stored in One Password."? @bradleycamacho 

Combining the two sentences for clarity

*   Drippie Monitor: tracks the execution and executability of drips within a Drippie contract.
*   Secrets Monitor: takes a Drippie contract as a parameter and monitors for any drips within that contract that use the `CheckSecrets` dripcheck contract. `CheckSecrets` is a dripcheck that allows a drip to begin once a specific secret has been revealed (after a delay period) and cancels the drip if a second secret is revealed. It's important to monitor for these secrets being revealed as this could be a sign that the secret storage platform has been compromised and someone is attempting to exfiltrate the ETH controlled by that drip.

For more information on these monitors and how to use them, [check out the repo](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/monitorism?tab=readme-ov-file#monitorism).

### `dispute-mon`

> Chain operators should consider running `op-dispute-mon`. It's an incredibly useful securities monitoring service to keep an eye on games, basically giving visibility into all the status of the games for the last 28 days.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Chain operators should consider running `op-dispute-mon`. It’s an essential security monitoring service that tracks game statuses, providing visibility over the last 28 days.
```

Reworded for a more formal tone.

### `op-challenger`

The `op-challenger` operates as the *honest actor* in the fault dispute system and defends the chain by securing the `OptimismPortal` and ensuring the game always resolves to the correct state of the chain.
For verifying the legitimacy of claims, `op-challenger` relies on a synced, trusted rollup node as well as a trace provider (e.g., [Cannon](/stack/protocol/fault-proofs/cannon)). See the [OP-Challenger Explainer](/stack/protocol/fault-proofs/challenger) for more information on this service.

To enable metrics, pass the `--metrics.enabled` flag to `op-challenger` and follow the steps above for customization options.

```
    --metrics.addr value                (default: "0.0.0.0")               ($OP_CHALLENGER_METRICS_ADDR)
          Metrics listening address
   
    --metrics.enabled                   (default: false)                   ($OP_CHALLENGER_METRICS_ENABLED)
          Enable the metrics server
   
    --metrics.port value                (default: 7300)                    ($OP_CHALLENGER_METRICS_PORT)
          Metrics listening port
```

## Next Steps

> *   If you experience difficulty at any stage of this process, please reach out to [developer support](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/developers/discussions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   If you encounter difficulties at any stage of this process, please reach out to [developer support](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/developers/discussions).
```
